index.rst, before:

..
  Technote content.

  See https://developer.lsst.io/docs/rst_styleguide.html
  for a guide to reStructuredText writing.

  Do not put the title, authors or other metadata in this document;
  those are automatically added.

  Use the following syntax for sections:

  Sections
  ========

  and

  Subsections
  -----------

  and

  Subsubsections
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  To add images, add the image file (png, svg or jpeg preferred) to the
  _static/ directory. The reST syntax for adding the image is

  .. figure:: /_static/filename.ext
     :name: fig-label
     :target: http://target.link/url

     Caption text.

   Run: ``make html`` and ``open _build/html/index.html`` to preview your work.
   See the README at https://github.com/lsst-sqre/lsst-technote-bootstrap or
   this repo's README for more info.

   Feel free to delete this instructional comment.

:tocdepth: 1

.. Please do not modify tocdepth; will be fixed when a new Sphinx theme is shipped.

.. sectnum::

.. Add content below. Do not include the document title.

.. note::

   SQuaRE instructions for making official releases



The LSST Science Pipelines Release Process
==========================================

The LSST stack is a large mixed Python/C++ codebase split among many repos with
multiple dependencies between them built by a niche build system. The release
process is therefore a bit complex and can be protracted. In an attempt not to
have to co-ordinate the state of the release with 80+ developers, or worse,
have them down tools while a release is being minted, this process has been
optimized to impact development as little as possible. Unless a developer needs
to be called upon to fix a failing integration or platform test, she can carry
on as normal.

In gross, the conceptual steps are:

#. A successful weekly release is identified that forms the basis for the
   official release.

#. The first release candidate (``rc1``) is created using that weekly build as a seed.
   This means that it does not matter if the codebase's master has moved on in
   the meanwhile.

#. The ``rc`` is announced for developer testing

#. Additional ``rc`` are created and announced, if/as necessary to resolve
   any release blocking issues that may arise.

#. Documentation is updated on a branch (release notes, installation
   instructions, metrics report)

#. The final release is created using the last ``rc`` verbatim (ie., the
   accepted ``rc`` and final release code should be identical except for the
   name of git/eups tags) and the documentation merged to ``master``.


Kicking-off the process
-----------------------

The first step is to establish whether it is a good time to make a release, eg.
if many developers are about to push significant features, it may be better to
wait for them to finish. Announce the intent to make a release in the ``#dm``
channel and inform all DM T/CAMs and the DM System Engineer.

If it is generally a good time, identify the nearest weekly release, this will
be the seed for the release candidate.

Announce start of release process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Next, start a clo_ post to use for status updates using the clo-stubb_.

Branching the docs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

At this point you should branch pipelines_lsst_io_.  so as not to capture any
changes on the ``master`` branch that may occur during the release process.

Note that the branch does not have a ``v`` prefix.

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/lsst/pipelines_lsst_io.git
   cd pipelines_lsst_io
   git checkout -b 888.0.x
   git push -u origin 888.0.x

Identify base weekly build
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Identify the *git tag* of the weekly build you wish to base the release release
candidate upon, say ``w.9999.52``.  This should be determined by discussion
with the product owner and team developer.

Example method for listing weekly git tags:

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/lsst/lsst_distrib.git
   cd lsst_distrib
   git tag -l w.*


1st Release Candidate
---------------------

Build and Publish
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Run the jenkins official-release_ job.  The source git refs should be only the
tag of the "seed" weekly release.  The release tag **must** start with a ``v``
and end with ``.rc1``.

See git-tags_ for details on the formatting of git tags.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: w.9999.52
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: v888.0.0.rc1
   O_LATEST: false

Announce rc1
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Update the release status clo_ post to to announce the
availability of ``rc1``.


2nd+ Release Candidate(s)
-------------------------

An ``.rcX``, where X is ``> 1``, is only required if a problem is found with
the initial ``rc``.

Any subsequent ``rc`` differs slightly from the initial ``rc1`` process
because it inherently is not identical to a previous ``git tag`` (if it was,
there would be no reason to produce another ``rc``). The creation of a git
release branch prior to ``rc1`` would eliminate the differences.

Branch, Merge
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Any git repository that needs to be modified for additional ``rc`` releases
should be **branched** and have the necessary changes merged to a release
branch.  Eg., if changes were needed in ``v888.0.0.rc1`` a "release branch"
along the lines of ``v888.0.x`` should be created in the repos that need
changes.

(**TBD**: merge to master and cherry-pick to release branch or merge to release
branch and merge to ``master``???)

Test Release Branch(es)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a sanity check, run the jenkins stack-os-matrix_ job to verify that the
release branch + previous ``rcX`` tag combination is buildable prior to
attempting to build and publish the new ``rc``.

Example 1:

.. code-block:: text

   REFS: v888.0.x v888.0.0.rc1
   PRODUCTS: lsst_distrib lsst_ci

Build and Publish
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Run the jenkins official-release_ job.

For input source git refs use the previous ``rc`` tag along with the release
branch(es).  **Ensure** that the release branch is specified to the **left** of
the ``rcX`` tag in the listing of git refs.

Example 1:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: v888.0.x v888.0.0.rc1
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: v888.0.0.rc2
   O_LATEST: false

Example 2:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: v888.0.x v888.0.0.rc5
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: v888.0.0.rc6
   O_LATEST: false

Announce rcX
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Again, the post made from the clo-stubb_ should be updated to announce the
current ``rcX``.


Final Release
-------------

Note that a *Final Release* differs from a *Release Candidate* in that the DM
internal/first party git repositories receive a *git tag* that *does not* have
an alphabetic prefix (eg., ``v``).  This has the effect of changing the *eups*
version strings as ``lsst-build`` sets the *eups* product version based on the
most recent git ref that has an *integer* as the first character.

A consequence of this behavior is that the final git tag **must** be present
prior to the production of ``eupspkg``/*eups tag*.

Build and Publish
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Run the jenkins official-release_ job.

The source input **must only be** the latest ``rc`` tag.

The ``O_LATEST`` flag controls if the produced science pipelines docker image
has the ``-o_latest`` docker tags applied to it.  This should only be set on a
final release AND only if the release is the highest version release.  For
example, if ``99.0.0`` has been release and a ``98.0.1`` bugfix release is
being made, ``O_LATEST`` should not be set.

Example 1:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: v888.0.0.rc6
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: 888.0.0
   O_LATEST: false

Branch ``newinstall.sh`` repo
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this process we make use of the fact that git doesn't care whether a ref is
a tag or a branch to constrain the number of branches to repositories that need
retroactive maintenance or need to be available in more than one cadence. One
such example is the ``lsst`` repo since it contains newinstall.sh_ which
sets the version of eups, and that may be different for an official release
than the current bleed.

Note that the branch does not have ``v`` prefix.

Branch the lsst_ repo:

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/lsst/lsst.git
   cd lsst
   git checkout -b 888.0.x
   git push -u origin 888.0.x

Now in ``lsst/scripts/newinstall.sh`` change the canonical reference for this
newinstall to be one associated with the current branch:

.. code-block:: text

   NEWINSTALL_URL="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lsst/lsst/v888.0.x/scripts/newinstall.sh"

and commit and push.

This means that if you need to update ``newinstall.sh`` for bleed users,
official-release users will not be prompted to update to the latest version,
but will phone home against their official-release branch for hotfixes.

Also double-check for other things that might need to be updated, like the
documentation links (though these should really be fixed on master prior to
branching or cherry-picked back).

Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Documentation to be collected for the release notes in pipelines_lsst_io_ is:

- Release notes from the T/CAMs for Pipelines, SUI, and DAX

- Characterization report from the DM or SQuaRE scientist

- Known issues and pre-requisites from the T/CAM for SQuaRE

- Before merging to master, ask the Documentation Engineer to review

- Update the ``newinstall.rst`` page on your release branch of
  pipelines_lsst_io_ with the new download location of the ``newinstall.sh``
  script.

Announce official release
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Announce the final release on clo_.


Other OS checking
-----------------

While we only officially support the software on certain platforms
(`RHEL/CentOS 7` is the reference, and we CI `MacOS` and `RHEL 6`), we check in
a number of other popular platforms (eg `Ubuntu`, newer versions of `CentOS`
etc) by spinning up machines on Digital Ocean (typically) and following the
user install instructions. This also allows us to check the user from-scratch
installation instructions including the pre-requisites.



.. _clo-stubb:

c.l.o stubb
===========

.. code-block:: text

  Here is where we currently are in the release process. Current step in bold.

  Precursor Steps
  ---------------------------------

  1. Identify any pre-release blockers ("must-have features") :tools:
  2. Wait for them to clear

  Release Engineering Steps
  -------------------------------

  1. Branch 888.0.x of newinstall.sh
  1. Build and publish rc1 release candidate (based on w.9999.52)
  1. **Wait for first round of bugs to clear**
  1. Build and publish additional rcX releases if/as necessary
  1. Full OS testing (see https://ls.st/faq )
  1. Build and publish final release

  Documentation Steps
  -------------------------

  1. Update Prereqs/Install
  1. Update Known Issues
  1. Gather Release notes
  1. Gather Metrics report
  1. **Email announcement**



Github teams
============

There are three "special" teams in the LSST Github org:

- ``Data Management``

- ``DM Externals``

- ``DM Auxilliaries``

These are used in the release process in the following way:

- ``Data Management`` repos are a dependency of ``lsst_distrib`` and should be
  tagged with the bare release version, eg. ``888.0.0``, unless the repo is also
  a member of the ``DM Externals`` team.  All repos tagged as part of a release
  should be members of the ``Data Management`` team to ensure that DM
  developers are able to modify all components of a release.

- ``DM Externals`` also indicates a dependency of ``lsst_distrib`` but one that
  is tagged with a ``v`` prefix in front of the release version. Eg.,
  ``v888.0.0`` This is required because ``lsst-build`` derives the eups product
  version string from git tags that begin with a number.  DM developers prefer
  that eups display external packages version string rather than of a DM
  composite release. Thus the ``v`` prefix causes the git tag to be ignored by
  ``lsst_distrib``.  "External" repos must not also be members of ``DM
  Auxilliaries``.

- ``DM Auxilliaries`` are repos that we want to snapshot as part of a release
  but are not an eups dependency of ``lsst_distrib``. "Aux" repos must not also
  be members of ``DM Externals``.



Format of "tags"
================

.. _git-tags:

git tags
--------

- DM produced code this is part of an "official" release  **must** have a git
  tag that starts with a *number*

- "official" release git tags on external/third-party software that DM has
  repackaged must be prefixed with a ``v`` but are otherwise identical to that
  on DM produced code. Eg., ``888.0.0 -> v888.0.0``

- Non-"official" releases, release candidates, weekly builds, etc. **must**
  start with a *letter*

- **shall** only use ``[a-z]``, ``[0-9]``, and ``.``

  * *lowercase* latin alphabet characters **shall** be used; *uppercase*
    characters are forbidden

  * These common characters **must not** be used: ``-``, ``_``, ``/``


Examples of *valid* (good) git tags

.. code-block:: text

  # unofficial builds
  d.9999.01.02
  w.9999.52

  # release candidate
  v888.0.0.rc99

  # official release of DM produced code
  888.0.0

  # official release of external/third-party product
  v888.0.0

Examples of *invalid* (bad) git tags

.. code-block:: text

  d_9999_01_02
  w_9999_52
  v888-0-0-rc99
  888_0_0
  v888_0_0
  foo/bar

eups tags
^^^^^^^^^

- **must not** start with a numeric value

- **shall** only use ``[a-z]``, ``[0-9]``, and ``_``

  * *lowercase* latin alphabet characters **shall** be used; *uppercase*
    characters are forbidden

  * EUPS reportedly has or has had problems with ``.`` and ``-``

- official releases and release candidates **must** be prefixed with ``v``


Examples of *valid* (good) eups tags

.. code-block:: text

  # unofficial builds
  d_9999_01_02
  w_9999_52

  # release candidate
  v888_0_0_rc99

  # official release of DM produced code AND external/third-party product
  v888_0_0

Examples of *invalid* (bad) eup tags

.. code-block:: text

  123
  d.9999.01.02
  w.9999.52
  v888_0-rc99
  888.0.0
  v888.0.0
  foo/bar

git <-> eups tag conversion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The "tags" along each row in the following table should be considered
equivalent conversions.

=============  ============  =============
internal git   external git  eups tag
=============  ============  =============
d.9999.01.02   d.9999.01.19  d_9999_01_02
w.9999.52      w.9999.52     w_9999_52
v888.0.0.rc99  v88.0.0.rc99  v888_0_0_rc99
888.0.0        v888.0.0      v888_0_0
=============  ============  =============



Conda Environment/Packages Update
=================================

There are conflicting pressures of updating the conda package list frequently
to minimize the amount of [likely] breakage at one time and resisting changes
as the git ``sha1`` of the conda environment files is used to defined the
``ABI`` of the eups ``tarball`` packages.


Adding a new Conda package
--------------------------

#. The name of the package needs to "bleed" or un-versioned environment files in
   the ``lsst/lsstsw`` repo. Which are:

    - https://github.com/lsst/lsstsw/blob/master/etc/conda3_bleed-linux-64.txt
    - https://github.com/lsst/lsstsw/blob/master/etc/conda3_bleed-osx-64.txt

    These env files are currently kept in the original conda environment file
    format and have not yet been migrated to the newer ``yaml`` based format as
    it only works with fairly recent conda releases. (*TODO* migrate to `yaml`
    format after DM-14011 is merged).

    The bleed env files should be keep in sync with the *exception* of the
    ``nomkl`` package, which is required on ``linux``.  Also note that the env
    files should be kept sorted to allow for clean ``diff`` s.

#. The regular conda env files need to be updated by running a fresh install
   with ``deploy -b``` (bleed install) and then manually exporting the env to a
   file.  A side effect of this is other package versions will almost certainly
   change and this **is an ABI breaking event**. The existing env files are:

    - https://github.com/lsst/lsstsw/blob/master/etc/conda3_packages-linux-64.txt
    - https://github.com/lsst/lsstsw/blob/master/etc/conda3_packages-osx-64.txt

    ``conda list -e`` should be run on ``linux`` and ``osx`` installs and the
    results committed for both platforms as **a single commit** so that the the
    abbrev sha1 of the latest commit for both files will be the same.

#. As an abbreviated sha1 of the ``lsst/lsstsw`` repo is used to select which
   [version of] conda env files are used and to define the eups binary tarball
   "ABI", jenkins needs to know this value to ensure that ``newinstall.sh`` is
   explicitly using the correct ref and to construct the paths of the tarball
   ``EUPS_PKGROOT`` s.  The ``lsstsw_ref`` / ``LSST_LSSTSW_REF`` needs to be
   updated at:

    - https://github.com/lsst-sqre/jenkins-dm-jobs/blob/master/etc/scipipe/build_matrix.yaml#L10
    - https://github.com/lsst/lsst/blob/master/scripts/newinstall.sh#L33

#. The ~last major release should be rebuilt in the new "ABI" ``EUPS_PKGROOT`` so
   that that newinstall.sh from master will still be able to do a binary
   install of the current major release.  This may be done by triggering a
   Jenkins ``release/tarball-matrix`` build.


.. _official-release: https://ci.lsst.codes/blue/organizations/jenkins/release%2Fofficial-release/activity/
.. _pipelines_lsst_io: https://github.com/lsst/pipelines_lsst_io
.. _clo: https://community.lsst.org
.. _lsst: https://github.com/lsst/lsst
.. _newinstall.sh: https://github.com/lsst/lsst/blob/master/scripts/newinstall.sh
.. _stack-os-matrix: https://ci.lsst.codes/blue/organizations/jenkins/stack-os-matrix/activity

Commit message:

Made section 5 consistent with RFC-563 implementation

index.rst, after:

..
  Technote content.

  See https://developer.lsst.io/docs/rst_styleguide.html
  for a guide to reStructuredText writing.

  Do not put the title, authors or other metadata in this document;
  those are automatically added.

  Use the following syntax for sections:

  Sections
  ========

  and

  Subsections
  -----------

  and

  Subsubsections
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  To add images, add the image file (png, svg or jpeg preferred) to the
  _static/ directory. The reST syntax for adding the image is

  .. figure:: /_static/filename.ext
     :name: fig-label
     :target: http://target.link/url

     Caption text.

   Run: ``make html`` and ``open _build/html/index.html`` to preview your work.
   See the README at https://github.com/lsst-sqre/lsst-technote-bootstrap or
   this repo's README for more info.

   Feel free to delete this instructional comment.

:tocdepth: 1

.. Please do not modify tocdepth; will be fixed when a new Sphinx theme is shipped.

.. sectnum::

.. Add content below. Do not include the document title.

.. note::

   SQuaRE instructions for making official releases



The LSST Science Pipelines Release Process
==========================================

The LSST stack is a large mixed Python/C++ codebase split among many repos with
multiple dependencies between them built by a niche build system. The release
process is therefore a bit complex and can be protracted. In an attempt not to
have to co-ordinate the state of the release with 80+ developers, or worse,
have them down tools while a release is being minted, this process has been
optimized to impact development as little as possible. Unless a developer needs
to be called upon to fix a failing integration or platform test, she can carry
on as normal.

In gross, the conceptual steps are:

#. A successful weekly release is identified that forms the basis for the
   official release.

#. The first release candidate (``rc1``) is created using that weekly build as a seed.
   This means that it does not matter if the codebase's master has moved on in
   the meanwhile.

#. The ``rc`` is announced for developer testing

#. Additional ``rc`` are created and announced, if/as necessary to resolve
   any release blocking issues that may arise.

#. Documentation is updated on a branch (release notes, installation
   instructions, metrics report)

#. The final release is created using the last ``rc`` verbatim (ie., the
   accepted ``rc`` and final release code should be identical except for the
   name of git/eups tags) and the documentation merged to ``master``.


Kicking-off the process
-----------------------

The first step is to establish whether it is a good time to make a release, eg.
if many developers are about to push significant features, it may be better to
wait for them to finish. Announce the intent to make a release in the ``#dm``
channel and inform all DM T/CAMs and the DM System Engineer.

If it is generally a good time, identify the nearest weekly release, this will
be the seed for the release candidate.

Announce start of release process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Next, start a clo_ post to use for status updates using the clo-stubb_.

Branching the docs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

At this point you should branch pipelines_lsst_io_.  so as not to capture any
changes on the ``master`` branch that may occur during the release process.

Note that the branch does not have a ``v`` prefix.

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/lsst/pipelines_lsst_io.git
   cd pipelines_lsst_io
   git checkout -b 888.0.x
   git push -u origin 888.0.x

Identify base weekly build
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Identify the *git tag* of the weekly build you wish to base the release release
candidate upon, say ``w.9999.52``.  This should be determined by discussion
with the product owner and team developer.

Example method for listing weekly git tags:

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/lsst/lsst_distrib.git
   cd lsst_distrib
   git tag -l w.*


1st Release Candidate
---------------------

Build and Publish
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Run the jenkins official-release_ job.  The source git refs should be only the
tag of the "seed" weekly release.  The release tag **must** start with a ``v``
and end with ``.rc1``.

See git-tags_ for details on the formatting of git tags.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: w.9999.52
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: v888.0.0.rc1
   O_LATEST: false

Announce rc1
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Update the release status clo_ post to to announce the
availability of ``rc1``.


2nd+ Release Candidate(s)
-------------------------

An ``.rcX``, where X is ``> 1``, is only required if a problem is found with
the initial ``rc``.

Any subsequent ``rc`` differs slightly from the initial ``rc1`` process
because it inherently is not identical to a previous ``git tag`` (if it was,
there would be no reason to produce another ``rc``). The creation of a git
release branch prior to ``rc1`` would eliminate the differences.

Branch, Merge
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Any git repository that needs to be modified for additional ``rc`` releases
should be **branched** and have the necessary changes merged to a release
branch.  Eg., if changes were needed in ``v888.0.0.rc1`` a "release branch"
along the lines of ``v888.0.x`` should be created in the repos that need
changes.

(**TBD**: merge to master and cherry-pick to release branch or merge to release
branch and merge to ``master``???)

Test Release Branch(es)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a sanity check, run the jenkins stack-os-matrix_ job to verify that the
release branch + previous ``rcX`` tag combination is buildable prior to
attempting to build and publish the new ``rc``.

Example 1:

.. code-block:: text

   REFS: v888.0.x v888.0.0.rc1
   PRODUCTS: lsst_distrib lsst_ci

Build and Publish
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Run the jenkins official-release_ job.

For input source git refs use the previous ``rc`` tag along with the release
branch(es).  **Ensure** that the release branch is specified to the **left** of
the ``rcX`` tag in the listing of git refs.

Example 1:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: v888.0.x v888.0.0.rc1
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: v888.0.0.rc2
   O_LATEST: false

Example 2:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: v888.0.x v888.0.0.rc5
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: v888.0.0.rc6
   O_LATEST: false

Announce rcX
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Again, the post made from the clo-stubb_ should be updated to announce the
current ``rcX``.


Final Release
-------------

Note that a *Final Release* differs from a *Release Candidate* in that the DM
internal/first party git repositories receive a *git tag* that *does not* have
an alphabetic prefix (eg., ``v``).  This has the effect of changing the *eups*
version strings as ``lsst-build`` sets the *eups* product version based on the
most recent git ref that has an *integer* as the first character.

A consequence of this behavior is that the final git tag **must** be present
prior to the production of ``eupspkg``/*eups tag*.

Build and Publish
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Run the jenkins official-release_ job.

The source input **must only be** the latest ``rc`` tag.

The ``O_LATEST`` flag controls if the produced science pipelines docker image
has the ``-o_latest`` docker tags applied to it.  This should only be set on a
final release AND only if the release is the highest version release.  For
example, if ``99.0.0`` has been release and a ``98.0.1`` bugfix release is
being made, ``O_LATEST`` should not be set.

Example 1:

.. code-block:: text

   SOURCE_GIT_REFS: v888.0.0.rc6
   RELEASE_GIT_TAG: 888.0.0
   O_LATEST: false

Branch ``newinstall.sh`` repo
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this process we make use of the fact that git doesn't care whether a ref is
a tag or a branch to constrain the number of branches to repositories that need
retroactive maintenance or need to be available in more than one cadence. One
such example is the ``lsst`` repo since it contains newinstall.sh_ which
sets the version of eups, and that may be different for an official release
than the current bleed.

Note that the branch does not have ``v`` prefix.

Branch the lsst_ repo:

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/lsst/lsst.git
   cd lsst
   git checkout -b 888.0.x
   git push -u origin 888.0.x

Now in ``lsst/scripts/newinstall.sh`` change the canonical reference for this
newinstall to be one associated with the current branch:

.. code-block:: text

   NEWINSTALL_URL="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lsst/lsst/v888.0.x/scripts/newinstall.sh"

and commit and push.

This means that if you need to update ``newinstall.sh`` for bleed users,
official-release users will not be prompted to update to the latest version,
but will phone home against their official-release branch for hotfixes.

Also double-check for other things that might need to be updated, like the
documentation links (though these should really be fixed on master prior to
branching or cherry-picked back).

Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Documentation to be collected for the release notes in pipelines_lsst_io_ is:

- Release notes from the T/CAMs for Pipelines, SUI, and DAX

- Characterization report from the DM or SQuaRE scientist

- Known issues and pre-requisites from the T/CAM for SQuaRE

- Before merging to master, ask the Documentation Engineer to review

- Update the ``newinstall.rst`` page on your release branch of
  pipelines_lsst_io_ with the new download location of the ``newinstall.sh``
  script.

Announce official release
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Announce the final release on clo_.


Other OS checking
-----------------

While we only officially support the software on certain platforms
(`RHEL/CentOS 7` is the reference, and we CI `MacOS` and `RHEL 6`), we check in
a number of other popular platforms (eg `Ubuntu`, newer versions of `CentOS`
etc) by spinning up machines on Digital Ocean (typically) and following the
user install instructions. This also allows us to check the user from-scratch
installation instructions including the pre-requisites.



.. _clo-stubb:

c.l.o stubb
===========

.. code-block:: text

  Here is where we currently are in the release process. Current step in bold.

  Precursor Steps
  ---------------------------------

  1. Identify any pre-release blockers ("must-have features") :tools:
  2. Wait for them to clear

  Release Engineering Steps
  -------------------------------

  1. Branch 888.0.x of newinstall.sh
  1. Build and publish rc1 release candidate (based on w.9999.52)
  1. **Wait for first round of bugs to clear**
  1. Build and publish additional rcX releases if/as necessary
  1. Full OS testing (see https://ls.st/faq )
  1. Build and publish final release

  Documentation Steps
  -------------------------

  1. Update Prereqs/Install
  1. Update Known Issues
  1. Gather Release notes
  1. Gather Metrics report
  1. **Email announcement**



Github teams
============

There are three "special" teams in the LSST Github org:

- ``Data Management``

- ``DM Externals``

- ``DM Auxilliaries``

These are used in the release process in the following way:

- ``Data Management`` repos are a dependency of ``lsst_distrib`` and should be
  tagged with the bare release version, eg. ``888.0.0``, unless the repo is also
  a member of the ``DM Externals`` team.  All repos tagged as part of a release
  should be members of the ``Data Management`` team to ensure that DM
  developers are able to modify all components of a release.

- ``DM Externals`` also indicates a dependency of ``lsst_distrib`` but one that
  is tagged with a ``v`` prefix in front of the release version. Eg.,
  ``v888.0.0`` This is required because ``lsst-build`` derives the eups product
  version string from git tags that begin with a number.  DM developers prefer
  that eups display external packages version string rather than of a DM
  composite release. Thus the ``v`` prefix causes the git tag to be ignored by
  ``lsst_distrib``.  "External" repos must not also be members of ``DM
  Auxilliaries``.

- ``DM Auxilliaries`` are repos that we want to snapshot as part of a release
  but are not an eups dependency of ``lsst_distrib``. "Aux" repos must not also
  be members of ``DM Externals``.



Format of "tags"
================

.. _git-tags:

git tags
--------

- DM produced code this is part of an "official" release  **must** have a git
  tag that starts with a *number*

- "official" release git tags on external/third-party software that DM has
  repackaged must be prefixed with a ``v`` but are otherwise identical to that
  on DM produced code. Eg., ``888.0.0 -> v888.0.0``

- Non-"official" releases, release candidates, weekly builds, etc. **must**
  start with a *letter*

- **shall** only use ``[a-z]``, ``[0-9]``, and ``.``

  * *lowercase* latin alphabet characters **shall** be used; *uppercase*
    characters are forbidden

  * These common characters **must not** be used: ``-``, ``_``, ``/``


Examples of *valid* (good) git tags

.. code-block:: text

  # unofficial builds
  d.9999.01.02
  w.9999.52

  # release candidate
  v888.0.0.rc99

  # official release of DM produced code
  888.0.0

  # official release of external/third-party product
  v888.0.0

Examples of *invalid* (bad) git tags

.. code-block:: text

  d_9999_01_02
  w_9999_52
  v888-0-0-rc99
  888_0_0
  v888_0_0
  foo/bar

eups tags
^^^^^^^^^

- **must not** start with a numeric value

- **shall** only use ``[a-z]``, ``[0-9]``, and ``_``

  * *lowercase* latin alphabet characters **shall** be used; *uppercase*
    characters are forbidden

  * EUPS reportedly has or has had problems with ``.`` and ``-``

- official releases and release candidates **must** be prefixed with ``v``


Examples of *valid* (good) eups tags

.. code-block:: text

  # unofficial builds
  d_9999_01_02
  w_9999_52

  # release candidate
  v888_0_0_rc99

  # official release of DM produced code AND external/third-party product
  v888_0_0

Examples of *invalid* (bad) eup tags

.. code-block:: text

  123
  d.9999.01.02
  w.9999.52
  v888_0-rc99
  888.0.0
  v888.0.0
  foo/bar

git <-> eups tag conversion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The "tags" along each row in the following table should be considered
equivalent conversions.

=============  ============  =============
internal git   external git  eups tag
=============  ============  =============
d.9999.01.02   d.9999.01.19  d_9999_01_02
w.9999.52      w.9999.52     w_9999_52
v888.0.0.rc99  v88.0.0.rc99  v888_0_0_rc99
888.0.0        v888.0.0      v888_0_0
=============  ============  =============



Conda Environment/Packages Update
=================================

There are conflicting pressures of updating the conda package list frequently
to minimize the amount of [likely] breakage at one time and resisting changes
as the git ``sha1`` of the conda environment files is used to defined the
``ABI`` of the eups ``tarball`` packages.


Adding a new Conda package
--------------------------

#. The name of the package needs to "bleed" or un-versioned environment files in
   the ``lsst/scipipe_conda_env`` repo. Which are:

    - https://github.com/lsst/scipipe_conda_env/blob/master/etc/conda3_bleed-linux-64.txt
    - https://github.com/lsst/scipipe_conda_env/blob/master/etc/conda3_bleed-osx-64.txt

    After the implementation of DM-17457, the conda environments have been
    migrated to ``yaml`` format. This permits to add pip packages to the 
    environment definition.

    The bleed env files should be keep in sync with the *exception* of the
    ``nomkl`` package, which is required on ``linux``.  Also note that the env
    files should be kept sorted to allow for clean ``diff`` s.

#. The regular conda env files need to be updated by running a fresh install
   with ``deploy -b``` (bleed install) and then manually exporting the env to a
   file.  A side effect of this is other package versions will almost certainly
   change and this **is an ABI breaking event**. The existing env files are:

    - https://github.com/lsst/scipipe_conda_env/blob/master/etc/conda3_packages-linux-64.txt
    - https://github.com/lsst/scipipe_conda_env/blob/master/etc/conda3_packages-osx-64.txt

    ``conda list -e`` should be run on ``linux`` and ``osx`` installs and the
    results committed for both platforms as **a single commit** so that the the
    abbrev sha1 of the latest commit for both files will be the same.

#. As an abbreviated sha1 of the ``lsst/lsstsw`` repo is used to select which
   [version of] conda env files are used and to define the eups binary tarball
   "ABI", jenkins needs to know this value to ensure that ``newinstall.sh`` is
   explicitly using the correct ref and to construct the paths of the tarball
   ``EUPS_PKGROOT`` s.  The ``splenv_ref`` / ``LSST_SPLENV_REF`` needs to be
   updated at:

    - https://github.com/lsst-sqre/jenkins-dm-jobs/blob/master/etc/scipipe/build_matrix.yaml#L10
    - https://github.com/lsst/lsst/blob/master/scripts/newinstall.sh#L33

#. The ~last major release should be rebuilt in the new "ABI" ``EUPS_PKGROOT`` so
   that that newinstall.sh from master will still be able to do a binary
   install of the current major release.  This may be done by triggering a
   Jenkins ``release/tarball-matrix`` build.


.. _official-release: https://ci.lsst.codes/blue/organizations/jenkins/release%2Fofficial-release/activity/
.. _pipelines_lsst_io: https://github.com/lsst/pipelines_lsst_io
.. _clo: https://community.lsst.org
.. _lsst: https://github.com/lsst/lsst
.. _newinstall.sh: https://github.com/lsst/lsst/blob/master/scripts/newinstall.sh
.. _stack-os-matrix: https://ci.lsst.codes/blue/organizations/jenkins/stack-os-matrix/activity
